---
layout: post
title: "Terry Harpold Visit"
category: articles
context: Sound Media Poetry
date:   2012-01-08 08:03:00
tags: [aesthetics, poetry, media theory]
image:
  feature: texture-feature-02.jpg
---

I really enjoyed the Terry Harpold visit and I think it was the highlight of the year so far. I was really happy that he introduced us to the main themes in his research. Especially interesting was how he interacted with us. He really cared about our reactions. 
I also liked the interview he did with you about your poetry, as it was laid-back yet insightful. 

It really made me wish more classes would be like this - people talking about their vision and their ideas. While this of course would clash with many syllabi and it might be hard to grade the work in the end, I think these kinds of classes are far more engaging and students learn a lot more there (I appreciate the fact that your classes, like the classes of Frieder Nake I took at Bremen, aim for that).

I really loved how Harpold discussed “White-Faced Bromeliads on 20 Hectares” as well as “Family Tree” by Rozalie Hirs & Harm van den Dorpel. It was a great discussion of poetry as it provided a deep understanding of the work while encouraging us to think about the deeper issues connected to poetry. I myself for example would say that neither the text nor the digital version of “Family Tree” is better or worse. I’d rather say that both versions should be consumed together, as both tell the same story by different means. Consuming them together would therefore lead to an almost dialectical synthesis, as both the content in the text (thesis) as well as the form of the digital version (antithesis) lead to a synthesis, which makes the work approachable.

The theory of the Russian formalists he introduced us to really enriched my understanding of what poetry is all about and how it works. The idea, that in poetry rhythm, syntax, patterns and allusion are in the foreground, is plausible and catchy, but nobody ever articulated it to me in that way. 

Another really enlightening thought was the idea that we live in the incunabula of Digital Media. A really strong quote in this regard was that his father “can watch TV, but he can’t see TV”. Equally strong is the idea that his grandmother lived in a time where there was no human flight. I can only imagine having to explain to my kids that I am older than the World Wide Web and that we once used cables to connect stuff (I once read this comment on a forum, that while we may think of ourselves as open-minded and liberal people, which would be cool parents, our generation will inevitably be freaked out by stuff our kids do, too – if they for example start to date robots).

The concept of the digital incunabula also reminded me of an article I once read in WIRED magazine, where they argued that YouTube and Twitter embody independent new media themselves, although they yet have to find their real means of expression. On YouTube, for example, many people just upload TV and movie material. This, they said in the article, was somewhat similar to the advent of TV, where radio hosts were just sitting in front of the cameras reading their transcript. The same is true for media poetics, as they yet have to find their “classic” format (just like the symphony is the supreme format in music and the novel in literature).

I am also happy to have asked him why misspelled English is different from misspelled German and his explanation makes a lot of sense. I also loved that he did not just disregard phrases like “LOL” as some slang, but rather as a condensate of a variety of emotions. The reference to Orwell’s idea of Newspeak was also insightful. If you think about it, the Internet is especially encouraging this narrow-mindedness. On Facebook, for example, you don’t write interesting responses anymore and you don’t tell your friends what you think about their links and statues - you just like them. This is another fine example how Orwell’s predictions were out-competed by reality (British CCTV is another example).

Another really great concept is how language is shaping our worldview. Language of course forms how he memorize and reason about events, so I think it shapes a big part of our worldview. I read once that in languages where location is communicated in relation to cardinal directions, people are way better at pointing at exact directions. I myself, on the other hand, do not think that it makes a big difference if I speak and think in either English or German, although I think that I can express certain concepts more precisely in German. I haven’t yet decided if this is due to my lack of my English proficiency or due to the precision of the German language. 

Harpold introduced the hypothesis that language shapes our worldview and that the experience of language is often mediated. Therefore, the media conditions define our thoughts. This is a really interesting concept and I really have to think about it further. But I have the gut feeling that he might be right. Take for example how personal relationships are depicted in Hollywood cinema and how this shapes our idea of perfect love and friendship. Or how aspiration is destroyed by constantly being exposed to really great artwork. Whenever somebody starts painting, writing poetry or playing music, his first attempts will be horrible in comparison to their heros. This discourages many people, as nobody tells them that this is just normal. 
Harpold emphasis of the social relationship in reading is interesting and reminded me of the four-sides model of Friedemann Schulz von Thun. In Schulz von Thun’s model, every message includes factual information, self-revelation, relationship information and an appeal. As appeal and factual information are not that important in poetry, the relationship obviously becomes more important. But I think that Harpold somewhat underestimates the self-revelation, as a poet normally reveals a lot about himself while writing poetry, too. I know that for example post-World War II artists like John Cage tried to remove intention and purpose from their art, but I think that even they thereby conveyed something about themselves, their situation and their personality. Just like in Paul Watzlawick said: “One cannot not communicate”.  
